# Tagging and Categorizing Content [](id=tagging-and-categorizing-content)

Tags and categories are two important tools you can use to help organize
information on your portal and make it easier for your users to find the content
they're looking for through search or navigation. Tagging and categorizing web
content is easy. You can do it at the bottom of the same form you use to add
content. If you open the *Categorization* section of the form, you'll be
presented with an interface for adding tags and categories.

![Figure 5.1: Tagging and categorizing content can be done at the same time you
create it.](../../images/04-web-content-categorization.png)

The Control Panel contains an interface for managing tags and categories for
each site in the portal. This interface can be used to manage all your tags and
categories in one place. It is important that you both tag and categorize your
content when you enter it. Let's take a closer look at tags and categories.

## Tags [](id=tags)

Tags are an important tool that you can use to help organize information on your
portal and make it easier for your users to find content that they're looking
for. Tags are words or phrases that you can attach to any content on the
website. Tagging content will make your search results more accurate, and enable
you to use tools like the Asset Publisher to display content in an organized
fashion on a web page. There are two ways to create tags: you can do it through
the administrative console in the Control Panel, or on the fly as content is
created.

![Figure 5.2: The Add Tag Dialog](../../images/05-add-tag.png)

To create tags in the Control Panel, select the site that you want to create
tags for, and select *Tags*. From this screen, you will be able to view any
existing tags and make new ones. To create a new tag, simply click *Add Tag*.
You'll then be asked for the name of the tag, and you'll have the ability to set
permissions for viewing or managing the tag. You can also add properties to a
tag. Properties basically act like tags for your tags. Structurally, properties
are key-value pairs associated with specific tags that provide information about
your tags. You can edit existing tags from the *Tags* window of on the Control
Panel. You can change the tag name, change the tag's permissions, delete the
tag, or add properties.

Tags are not the only portal-wide mechanism for describing content: you can also
use categories.

## Categories [](id=categories)

Categories are similar in concept to tags, but are designed for use by
administrators, not regular users. Hierarchies of categories can be created, and
categories can be grouped together in *vocabularies*. While tags represent an ad
hoc method for users to group content together, categories exist to allow
administrators to organize content in a more official, hierarchical structure.
You can think of tags like the index of a book and categories like its table of
contents. Both serve the same purpose: to help users find the information
they seek.

Adding vocabularies and categories is similar to adding tags. Once you've
selected the site you want to work on, select *Categories* from the content
section of the Control Panel, and you will be presented with the categories
administration page.

![Figure 5.3: Categories Administration Page](../../images/05-categories.png)

Clicking on a vocabulary on the left displays any categories that have been
created under that vocabulary. You can create new vocabularies simply by
clicking *Add Vocabulary* and providing a name for it. You can create categories
in a similar fashion by choosing a vocabulary on the left, and then selecting
*Add Category*. Like tags, you can also provide properties for categories. Once
you have created some vocabularies and categories, you can take advantage of the
full capabilities of categories by creating a nested hierarchy of categories. To
nest categories, select what you want to be the parent category, then drag any
category that you want to become a child category onto it. You will see a plus
sign appear next to the name of the category you are dragging if you can add it
to the selected parent category; if you see a red *x* that means that you cannot
add that category as a subcategory of parent category that you have selected.

Once you have created a hierarchy of categories, your content creators will have
them available to apply to content that they create. Navigate to the Web Content
page of the Control Panel and click *Add Content*. Click the Categorization link
from the right-side menu and click *Select* on the vocabulary you would like to
use. A dialog box will appear with your categories. Select any relevant
categories by checking the box next to them, and they will be applied to the
content.

There are a several new enhancements to vocabularies and categories in Liferay
6.1. The three main features are targeted vocabularies, single/multi-valued
vocabularies, and separated widgets for every vocabulary.
