# Targeted Vocabularies [](id=targeted-vocabularies)

Targeted Vocabularies allow you to decide which vocabularies can be applied to
an asset type and which vocabularies are required for an asset type. To
configure these settings, go to the categories administration page and mouse
over the vocabulary in the list until you see the edit icon to the right. Select
the icon to reveal a dialog box like the one below.

![Figure 5.4: You can target vocabularies by checking the *Allow Multiple 
Categories* checkbox and then selecting the 
Asset Types.](../../images/targeted-vocabularies.png)

The default value for *Associated Asset Types* is *All Asset Types*. You can
fine tune your choices by using the *+* and *-* buttons, which narrows the scope
of the vocabulary to specific assets. In the screenshot above, notice how the
vocabulary `Famous Noses` is configured to be available for Blogs and Web
Content, but it is not required. It is mandatory, however, for Documents and
Media Documents.

## Single and Multi-valued Vocabularies [](id=single-and-multi-valued-vocabularies)

You can now decide if the user can choose one or more categories from the same
vocabulary to categorize an asset. If a vocabulary is single-valued you can only
choose one, and if it allows more, you can choose several categories.

![Figure 5.5: Single-valued vocabularies, on the left, use radio buttons while 
multi-valued vocabularies use 
checkboxes. .](../../images/multi-valued-vocabularies.png)

Setting vocabulary values is done through the categories administration page.
Edit a vocabulary and deselect the *Allow Multiple Categories* checkbox to set
single value vocabularies or use the default option to set multi-value
vocabularies.

## Separated Widgets [](id=separated-widgets)

The third important improvement is every vocabulary has its own separated
widget. These widgets appear in the Categorization section of every asset and
they allow users to easily select appropriate categories for that asset.

![Figure 5.6: Now that vocabularies have their own widgets, it's easy to select 
available  categories.](../../images/separated-widgets.png)

It's important to use tags and categories with all your content, so that content
is easier for users to find. Let's look at one of the ways users will make use
of tags and categories: searching for content. 
