# Accessing the Liferay Marketplace [](id=accessing-the-liferay-marketplace)

There are two ways to access the Marketplace.

1. Via the website--Using your favorite browser, you can navigate to the
   marketplace at
   [http://liferay.com/marketplace](http://liferay.com/marketplace).

2. Via Liferay--If you have a site up and running based on Liferay, you can use
   the Marketplace section of the control panel to access Marketplace content.

## The Basics [](id=the-basics)

No matter which method you choose, you will see the same content and apps.
 
If you are new to the Marketplace, the easiest way to access it is by using your
browser to navigate to
[http://liferay.com/marketplace](http://liferay.com/marketplace). You will be
presented with the Marketplace home page.

![Figure 13.1: Marketplace Home Page](../../images/marketplace-homepage.png) 
 
In the center of the page, you will see a number of icons. Each icon represents
an individual app and they are grouped into a couple of different areas:

* New To Marketplace: The latest apps added to the marketplace

* Featured Products: Liferay features a different set of apps each month

* Most Viewed: The top 10 most viewed apps

If you click on the title of an app, you can access details about the app,
including a description, the author's name, screenshots, price, latest version,
number of users, number of weekly installs, a link to the developer's
`liferay.com` profile page, a link to the developer's own website, a link to
report abuse and a Purchase button. You'll also be able to view version history,
read reviews left by other users or write your own review. 

![Figure 13.2: Marketplace App
Details](../../images/marketplace-app-details.png) 

If you click on the Purchase button, you'll be prompted to choose a purchase
type. You can purchase an app for your personal account or for your company. If
your company has already been registered, select it in the drop-down list. If
your company hasn't been registered, click the *Register Your Company* link to
register your company with Liferay Marketplace. Please see the *Creating a
Company* section below for details.
 
The left side of each page in the
[http://liferay.com/marketplace](http://liferay.com/marketplace) site contains a
Marketplace navigation menu. This menu contains links to various categories of
apps and themes available from Marketplace. Clicking on the individual
categories will allow you to browse apps in that category. To view all apps or
themes at once, click the *Apps* or *Themes* link and then the *See All* link in
the Apps or Themes portlet.

![Figure 13.3: Browsing Apps in
Marketplace](../../images/marketplace-browsing-apps.png)

Below the navigation menu is the search bar. This allows you to search for apps
with specific titles. Type in search terms and click *Search* to perform the
search.
 
## Logging In [](id=logging-in)

You do not need a `liferay.com` account in order to browse the Marketplace.
However, if you wish to purchase and download an app (or if you are a developer
and wish to create and upload new apps), you will need to establish a
`liferay.com` account and agree to the Marketplace Terms of Use. To get a new
`liferay.com` account, visit [http://www.liferay.com](http://www.liferay.com),
click *Sign In*, then *Create Account*, and sign up! Once you are signed in, you
will be able to fully utilize the Marketplace to find and use Marketplace apps.
 
## Marketplace Profile [](id=marketplace-profile)

On your existing `liferay.com` Home page, you'll notice a new link entitled *App
Manager*. The App Manager allows you to access information about the apps you've
purchased and apps you've uploaded to Marketplace. It also provides a mechanism
for uploading new apps to Marketplace. Once you submit your app, it will be
reviewed before appearing on the `liferay.com` Marketplace.

+$$$

**Tip:** Your `liferay.com` Home page is a private page. It's distinct from your 
public `liferay.com` Profile page.

$$$

## Managing Apps [](id=managing-apps)

The App Manager shows you relevant information related to your usage of
Marketplace. You'll find three tabs to help you manage your Marketplace apps:
*Purchased*, *Apps* and *Add an App*.

The Purchased tab lists the apps you have purchased. From this screen, you can
find information about the authors of the apps you have purchased. You can also
download or re-download the app (for example, if you lost your copy or have
re-installed Liferay and wish to re-deploy the app). This option is also useful
for downloading apps and deploying them to offline instances of Liferay that do
not have direct access to `liferay.com`.

![Figure 13.4: Purchased Apps](../../images/marketplace-purchased-apps.png)

If possible, it's best to log into your portal instance and install purchased
applications through the My Marketplace link in the control panel. This will
provide your portal instance with automatic update notices should they become
available. If you download applications this way, they can be hot-deployed.
 
The Apps tab lists apps you have authored and uploaded, showing you details such
as the number of downloads, the current price and other relevant information.
From here you can manage the apps you have created (please see the Marketplace
chapter of the Developer Guide for details on this topic).
 
![Figure 13.5: Upload an App](../../images/marketplace-upload-app.png)
 
Clicking on *Add an App* allows you to upload a new app and make it available in
the marketplace. Please see the Marketplace Developer Guide for more detail on
authoring your own app.

## Creating a Company [](id=creating-a-company)

To create and register a company with Liferay Marketplace, click the *Create a
Company* link in the left-hand navigation menu. Your first step is to see if
your company already exists on Liferay Marketplace. Enter your company name into
the search box and check if it's already been registered. If someone else from
your company has already created a company account on Liferay Marketplace, you
can click the *Request to Join this Company* button. This will send an email
notification to your company's Marketplace admin (the one who created your
company's Marketplace account). Your company's Marketplace admin will then be
able to add you to the company. If the company name you'd like to use is
available, click the *Register Your Company* button to move on to the next step. 

![Figure 13.6: Creating a
Company](../../images/marketplace-creating-new-company.png)

Your second step is to fill out your company's information. The public
information you must provide includes a company logo, the company name, a
company description, a company email address and a homepage URL. The private
information you must provide includes a company address, your company's country,
region, city, postal code and phone number. Additonal private information
required for validation includes a company email address and a legal tax
document. Once your company's Marketplace registration has been approved, you
will be your company's Marketplace admin! This means you'll be responsible for
handling Marketplace users' requests to join your company. Don't worry, you
don't have to be stuck with this responsibility. Once you've added other users
to your company, you can promote some of them to be company Marketplace admins
too.
