# Tracking app performance [](id=tracking-app-performance)

One of the main reasons for developing and publishing apps into the Marketplace
is to drive downloads and adoption of your app. The Marketplace enables you, as
the developer of your app, to get detailed reports about the number of views,
downloads, and installations of your app(s). To access these metrics, navigate
to *Home* &rarr; *App Manager* &rarr; *Apps*, click on the *Actions* button next
to the app for which you want metrics, and select the *Metrics* action.

![Figure 15.11: App metrics let you see graphically how many views, downloads, and installations your app has in the Marketplace.](../../images/marketplace-app-metrics-views.png) 

The view shown above is the default metrics view for a single app. Across the
top is a list of data series options (*Views*, *Downloads*, or *Installations*).
Below that, a date range can be chosen. In the middle, a graph is shown for the
data within the date range. Finally, the same data that is graphed is also shown
in tabular format, in case you want to know the exact values making up the
graph. The different types of data available to view are described below.

## Views [](id=views)

When someone searches or browses the Marketplace, they click on apps to see
detailed views of the apps they're interested in. When this occurs for your app,
a *View* is recorded for the app, and this data is what is shown on the App
Metrics screen when *Views* is selected at the top. *Views* is also the default
view, as shown above. The number of recorded views per day per user is
unlimited.

## Downloads [](id=downloads)

A download is recorded for your app when someone downloads a specific package of
a specific version of your app. The number of recorded downloads per day per
user is unlimited.

## Installations [](id=installations)

The Marketplace does a best effort in recording installations of your app on
Liferay instances. When a Liferay Administrator installs your app via the
Liferay Administration console (Control Panel), an *Install* is recorded for
your app.
