# Using Liferay as a Social Platform [](id=using-liferay-as-a-social-platform)

Whether you plan to build a social network or enable social applications as part
of your overall user experience, Liferay Portal has the tools to make those
features work for you. Starting with a suite of applications--including a
profile summary, activities feeds, social requests, a wall, and more--and
rounding things out with an API to handle relationships between users as well as
publish their activities to each other, Liferay Portal helps you implement
common features of social networks to enhance your existing site. 

![Figure 1.7: Liferay Portal provides feeds of social activities. These feeds
can contain entries from any of Liferay's built-in applications or applications
that you write.](../../images/01-social-activities.png)

Social relationships within Liferay Portal are ideally suited for many different
kinds of implementations, whether you're building a public social network or
want to enable social features in your corporate Intranet. Users can create
relationships within the system, allowing them to see updates from those whose
activity they need to track. That's far more powerful than having them subscribe
to multiple individual RSS feeds or visit multiple profiles, because the system
keeps track of the updates from those with whom you have a relationship,
automatically. 

More than this, however, Liferay is a great integration platform for social
applications. It fully supports the OpenSocial framework. You can use Liferay
Portal's built-in OpenSocial gadget editor to create and serve your own
OpenSocial gadgets. 

![Figure 1.8: Liferay Portal's OpenSocial gadget editor lets you rapidly create
social applications that can be served across the web to any other OpenSocial
container.](../../images/01-opensocial-gadget-editor.png)

Liferay Portal also supports the creation of Facebook applications; in fact, no
additional coding is necessary to publish your Liferay applications on Facebook
(you would, of course, need to use Facebook's API to use Facebook-specific
features--such as posting on users' timelines). The only thing you need to do is
get an API key and canvas page URL from Facebook. 

![Figure 1.9: Any Liferay application can be published to multiple social
networks with a few clicks.](../../images/01-facebook-integration.png)

As you can see, Liferay Portal is built for social applications: adding social
features to your web site, creating a social network of your own, creating
social applications to be published on other web sites, or building a social
application for Facebook. 

As with social applications, Liferay Portal is also an easy to use, robust
platform for any web application you're considering writing. In addition to
this, Liferay Portal is easily configured to be used as a shared hosting
platform for multiple web sites. Let's look at the benefits you can reap by
using Liferay Portal in these ways. 
